Acknowledgments and Copyright
=============================

======================
Acknowledgements
======================
This work has been supported under the Department of Energy’s Climate,
Ocean and Sea Ice Modeling project through the Computer Hardware Applied
Mathematics and Model Physics (CHAMMP) program, Climate Change
Prediction Program (CCPP), Improving the Characterization of Clouds,
Aerosols and the Cryosphere in Climate Models (Cloud-Cryo) program and
Scientific Discovery through Advanced Computing (SCIDAC) program, with
additional support from the T-3 Fluid Dynamics and Solid Mechanics Group
at Los Alamos National Laboratory. Special thanks are due to the
following people:

-  members of the CESM Polar Climate Working Group, including David
   Bailey, Cecilia Bitz, Bruce Briegleb, Tony Craig, Marika Holland,
   John Dennis, Julie Schramm, Bonnie Light and Phil Jones,

-  Andrew Roberts of the Naval Postgraduate School,

-  David Hebert and Olivier Lecomte for their melt pond work,

-  Jonathan Gregory of the University of Reading and the U.K. MetOffice
   for supplying tripole T-fold code and documentation,

-  Alison McLaren, Ann Keen and others working with the Hadley Centre
   GCM for testing non-standard model configurations and providing their
   code to us,

-  Daniel Feltham and his research group for several new
   parameterizations and documentation,

-  Sylvain Bouillon for the revised EVP approach,

-  the many researchers who tested beta versions of CICE 5 and waited
   patiently for the official release.

======================
Copyright
======================
© Copyright 2013, LANS LLC. All rights reserved. Unless otherwise
indicated, this information has been authored by an employee or
employees of the Los Alamos National Security, LLC (LANS), operator of
the Los Alamos National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC52-06NA25396
with the U.S. Department of Energy. The U.S. Government has rights to
use, reproduce, and distribute this information. The public may copy and
use this information without charge, provided that this Notice and any
statement of authorship are reproduced on all copies. Neither the
Government nor LANS makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes
any liability or responsibility for the use of this information.
Beginning with version 4.0, the CICE code carries Los Alamos Software
Release number LA-CC-06-012.
